Buy because you want to and because you like the place not because you are told it is a great investment etc.

Get preapproved.
Contact several lenders to get pre-approved. 

Google: Loan Shopping 
http://www.consumer.ftc.gov/articles/0189-shopping-mortgage
1.Get offers from several lenders
You don’t have to make a decision based on just one offer. In fact, you’ll probably make a better decision if you can compare multiple offers. See how to compare your offers
2.Make lenders compete for your business
We’ll show you how to compare offers and use them as bargaining chips with lenders. 
--> play the pros of one off on the cons of another and even the playing field out esp if you like one person but they have a worse deal up front. 

Ask about the loan’s annual percentage rate (APR). The APR takes into account not only the interest rate but also points, broker fees, and certain other credit charges that you may be required to pay, expressed as a yearly rate.

Ask what each fee includes. Several items may be lumped into one fee.
Ask for an explanation of any fee you do not understand. Some common fees associated with a home loan closing are listed on the Mortgage Shopping Worksheet.

http://www.consumer.ftc.gov/articles/pdf-0104-mortgage-shopping-worksheet.pdf



Pre-Approval:
1.Proof of Income:
all borrowers need to be prepared with 
W-2 statements from the past two years, 
recent pay stubs that show income
as well as year-to-date income, 
proof of any additional income such as alimony or bonuses and 
your two most recent years of tax returns. 

W2/Check Paystub

2.Proof Of Assets:
bank statements and investment account statements

3. Good Credit 
Most lenders today reserve the lowest interest rates for customers with a credit score of 740 or above
Credit Check

4. Employment Verification
Your lender will not only want to see your pay stubs, but is also likely to call your employer to verify that you are still employed and to check on your salary. If you have recently changed jobs, a lender may want to contact your previous employer. Lenders today want to make sure they are loaning only to borrowers with a stable employment. 

5. Documentation
Your lender will need to copy your driver's license and will need your Social Security number and your signature allowing the lender to pull a credit report.


Fill out Form 1003:
https://www.fanniemae.com/content/guide_form/1003rev.pdf
https://www.fanniemae.com/singlefamily/selling-servicing-guide-forms


Accounting of personal assets and liabilities:
assets: 2003 Saab 93 (YS 3FD 46Y 531 059 507), 1997 Kawasaki ZX6-E5 (JKA ZE4 E11 VB 512 481)
comic collection
liabilities: none


Taxes are killer.
Taxes are worse? than HOA fees?
